Keywords

patience
old
fool (fool, king lear, kent, cordelia, edgar, ...) : Disseminated term, court fools mirror those things
sight/blindness
nature
nothing
mad/madness : Oh Fool I shall go mad
conceive : Gloucester, edmond : conception
bond
accomodate/unaccomodated men : edgar as poor tom (lear)
children
daughter/father/son/sister
eclipse
storm (para-nature)
hand : Give me your hand
gods : kind gods/o ye gods

Setting : Paegan/Pre-christian, but written in a christian time.
Fortune : Mankind is wheel of fortune, doesn't know gonna fall (tragedy)
heart/Cordelia, other daughters are hard hearts
Weep, tears : Positions of power/weakness, are inverted. Female behaviours
Empowered positions : The king, father, patriarch, dukes. End up disempowered. Women become so empowered, so dried up that she should not bare children. Dangerous crossover, between male, female. What it means to be powerful related to age, social heirarchy, gender : A theme!

A play in which metaphorical language is very much present. Eyeless storm present, thematised in blinding of gloucester. Seeing turns into a paradox. Kent asks lear, why can't you see? Where is edmond, that edgar was betrayed. Has a revelation at the moment of blindness. Too powerful of a structure to be called a paradox. Lear wants to see patience, but cannot initially of the play. 

Lines seem very familiar, embdedded in our time. Wheel of Fortune = overarching structure. Fool gives off this sentiment. Attach yourself to the man whose wheel has gone up. Fool : don't go into the storm, go where it's warm. Kent is in stocks, (duke). Who is fool, who is king? Stock = low class punishment. Edmond at the end, the wheel has rotated full circle, I am here. Edmond sees blind father, edmond realises he's not quite at bottom. Not a play about cycle, but necessity to lose in order to find, to make something out of nothing, something lear says he cannot do. 

For a fall, there needs to be an established position. What do you see as primary field of reference? 1. Relentness downhill slide for a man, king = metaphorical high point. Balance with political reading of the play, very much play about british politics. Albany = Scotland, Cornwall = West of England. Parallels with King Brutus. King James gave titles of Cornwall, Albany. Pathos, human drama of play, being in dialogue with history, not forgettable about disunion. "Division" repeats. Very much a play in its own time about dangers of splitting up a country. 

2. Vulnerability, artifice of established hierarchy. Power vanquished easily by edmond/bad decision. Gloucester plot, lear plot. Gloucester is actively hoodwinked by edmond (plotting with letter), and lear household, lear takes a decision. As a moral fall, gloucester is not skeptical enough, not same kind of judgement lear makes. 

Two bad decisions, 
1. Division of kingdom in the first place
2. Rejection of Cordelia as affirmation or rejection. 

Ties in condensation of time : working of the grand mechanism : foot of throne to streets. 

What begins metaphorically become literal! Extravagant figures of speech become horrible visual truths. Chaos, order : external, internal things in the play. Degree is changed, nature takes over in every possible way, wonderful passages about this (sons, daughters rule fathers). 

3. Lear : More within context of family, than as a political play. But family drama has political consequence. Modern appropriation = Obama and family, nixon, clinton, etc. Political and personal are hard to divorce from each other. 

4. Quarrel bw kent, lear. What doust thou old man. Kent unmannerly, Lear is mad but not in a choas way, more not good judgement. Still a figure of speech. More like misremembering, power so infantilise lear. He begins to act out, losing the position of father/patriarch/monarch.

Theme : Tragedy arouses pity and fear in the spectator and cleans these emotions causing catharsis.

5. First scene = impatience, play about scripts. The ceremonial has already been designed. Some productions where you get a section of the map, very rehearsed. So, the refusal to participate in this scriptedness. This angers lear. 

I must make myself into a powerful figure : edmond's theme. Anatomical transperencies that give you different layers of signification that make a play powerful. Emotional of multitude. Resonant because it's not merely historical, not merely familial, but many things at once. 

Who owns lear?
Lear for the daughters is their imaginations of him, not him. 

Dimensions of lear >> dimensions of daughters. Characters of daughters are 1-dimensional? Both in love with father, then both in love with edmond. Is there any love in the play? Lovelessness of those daughters. Cordelia is a total wimp. You do me wrong, 1st scene, doesn't speak. 2nd scene act 4, she must speak and criticises sisters, still negative speaker, but is positive in the correctness sense. Lear now appreciates her, so lear becomes a better reader throughout the play. Regan is a more interesting character, not a better person. 

KNIGHTS.

Undecidables in the play, whether you believe them if their knights are disruptive. Lear is in "their" space. Striking however, is the scene when knights are being cut down. Love is being quantified. Do elder daugthers have a correct claim? 

Lear = bad example from past they try to undo. James unites Scotland, England. Number of attendants reduced from 100 to none. Daughters didn't want rauccoous knights in house, but you don't need any cuz you're not a king. Irony of opening scene. Lear doesn't understand implications of divisions. Corialanus : addition = name describing exploits. What is lear, when he is not king? First he learns he's nothig. Then he learns nothing is everything. Fantasy : along together in prison, ask for forgiveness, etc. Fantasy of leaving the world. Political, personal both for the characters, us tied together. Oversimplication : In the 17th century, political = 1st layer, human = 2nd. For us, human = 1st. Theme of domestic, extraordinary violation of gloucester's hospitality. Edmond overthrows. Question of domestic household. Scene 3, cross cut between storm outside and inside gloucester house. More painful = scenes of human cruelty. Questions of inside v outside are demarcated in the play.

Moments of comedy : Talks about new pranks of lear, fools are doing puns. Fairytale romance, dower cliff, Gloucester wants to jump. The fact that it's not sublime makes it sublime. He has "fallen" from height. Disguised edgar, says look down, describes a language of great distance. Effective sublimity, mental act to encounter sublime. Paints picture to encounter thing itself. It gets to nihilism through language. Kill, kill, kill, ... never, never, .... syntax breaks down for lear, then language is reconstructed in the recovery of the play. Get vile jelly out, substance of eye disembodied from human eye. Servants human want to reconstruct that, attempt in futile. Putting substance in absence, restoration of humanity. Lonely heriosm, appeal to fealty of servant. (parallel to kent). Servant not a noblemen, very visceral : loss of an eye, death of servant -> death of cornwall. 

LOCALISING SOME SCENES 

Exemplifies the fool : a many sided character, re-reading the scenes he's a part of

Act 1 Scene 4.
Fool is performing his court function before he becomes a sublime figure. (sublime = exceeds ordinary limits). Do thou for him stand. Fool = Lear. Early moment where inversion is a part of professional aparatus of fool, realm of political/domestic, hired to do this. One figure which can undercut royalty. What happens to the fool when he's removed from court setting? High low, king fool, social corrective to have staged employee changes when they were thrust out of doors. That's the point when the fool in storm scenes becomes appropriated by lear, not just a counterpoint. When we get to the storm scene, wonderful moment when they find the straw, last shall be first theme. Humanising of relationship between lear, fool. Cheeky voice of fool calls king "boy" pretending to exchange status. nuncle = nursery term for uncle, fool is allowed to be familiar in a way others aren't. 

Intimacy with fool > affection to daughters, demand for love is never met. Growing up gesture where they choose husband. Lear isn't hearing "all". Lear isn't demanding obedience but perfect love. Familiar language is very different from language he uses with them. Formality in these relationship is at odds with demand for political/love. 

Act 1 Scene 2. 

Thou nature art my goddess....

Edmond's speech (Gloucester household). What's happening rhetorically in this speech?

i. Style : 
Form : sololiquy, speaks directly to audience, purports to be addressing. An abstract speaker. (this happens most of the play). A cultural issue, bastards. Flipping upside down language. Something enormously self generated energy. Why Lear girls would find him attractive. Self made man. Engendering, invention of an idea, scripted something which is going to have some effects. Everything he says about letter would disallow value, but perfromance gives value in fooling gloucester. (Base ghonna top the legitimate), more inversion theme. 

Plotting : I must have edgar's land. Figure of anarchy, but speech of evil (univeral wolf)? Not exactly. Wicked though he is. He will not be pigenholed, sense of self-invention. Not a hero, but energy contrasted by division of kindgom. 

Edmond is acknowledged, just not given inheritance. Figures of negative energy are very popular, poweful theatrical characters. Fascination of evil. Moral judgement is a different question. 

Act 2 Scene 2 Line 450.

What need you 5 or 20 
What need 1

O reason not the need
...
thou art a lady
...
patience I need
...
Oh fool I shall go mad.


Nature chimes in with rain (I shall not weep), storm, tempest. 

Words popping out :
i. Unnatural : All nature breaks down around him. Edmonds evocation to nature. Natural relation to bond
ii. Superfluous : Also heard with gloucester -> distribute wealth. Having more than nature needs, superflux = we have extra we should give. Lear superfluous = wealthy, privileged, charicature of himself, lust dieted man. Even beggars have more than their need. Not about need! It's about gifts, generosity.

Speech is why it's not about need. He has become a poor old man. He's looking at age, gender divide. 
Request for revenge : If he had been able to revenge, he would have wiped everyone out. Lear not taking revenge is forced to learn a lesson, forced to deal with life. Stage sign for fealty : kneeling. Lear kneels to Cordelia. They both kneel in the scene with stripping. Who kneels to whom.

Why self interruptions in the scene?
He hasn't gone mad to the extent that he can conjure things. Doesn't want to fall into RR (weeping woman). Storm, subjects himself to theme of patience. Struck by plural, 100,000 flaws, revenges, division, everything is spraying apart. Nothing is gonna be complete anymore.

Why does Cordelia have to die?
Gains his heart after losing his heart. It is like death of a martyr. Sunshine and rain at once, we do hope that she doesn't die, attempt to resurrect her. Last lines of the play. 

Kent : No,no, no cause no cause no cause...

Edgar : We .... 

We = edgar, audience, diminished survivors (greatest generation phenomenon), he didn't mean when he asked her for it.

PLAGUE

Theme of the bubonic plague, ref Week 1 slides. Saturated with images of death, nihilism and desperation.

TRAGEDY : 

Action more important than characters. 
Break tragic cycle : Divine intervention
Perepetia : Reversal (arrival of messenger), everything goes down the hill. 
Anognorosis : Recognition. Recognition + reversal -> suffering.

COMEDY : 
Aristophanes, shorter formats, comical characters. It makes fun of beliefs and rituals, but doesn't satirise. Women seeking power. Comedy is defiance of definition. Contrast between dehumanising automatism, and explorative humanity.
